# Internationalization (i18n)

Axe API provides the fundamentals of internationalization (`i18n`) by handling the current language selection process.

Since Axe API is Rest API Framework, it does NOT have any user-related content except form validation messages. As the Axe API Core Team, we believe that giving developers freedom is more important than building an all-in-one framework.

In this section, you may find everything about internationalization.

## Configuration

As a developer, you are able to define which languages are supported in the `Config/Application.ts` file, with the `default language` like the following example.

```ts
const config: IApplicationConfig = {
  // ...other configurations
  supportedLanguages: ["en-GB", "en", "de"],
  defaultLanguage: "en-GB",
};
```

:::tip
You should use the [ISO 639-1 Standard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISO_639-1_codes) in configurations.
:::

You should pick a default language, and also the supported languages as an array.

## Setting the current language

Clients are able to select the preferred languages by [Accept-Language](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Accept-Language) request HTTP header. Please check the following example out.

```yaml
Accept-Language: fr-CH, fr;q=0.9, en;q=0.8, de;q=0.7, *;q=0.5
```

Basically, we define that to see the content in `fr-CH` (Swiss French) with this HTTP Header. Also, the client is accepting to see the content in any other language in case `fr-CH` is not supported by the API. `q=` parameter is refer to priority.

:::tip
You can find more in the [Accept-Language](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Accept-Language) documentation.
:::

Axe API analyzes the `Accept-Language` HTTP header and decides in which language the content will be presented. Also, it uses the `defaultLanguage` value if there is no matched language between the client and the server.

This is a very efficient way to determine which language will be used with the HTTP context.

## Current Language

Axe API carries the `currentLanguage` value in all HTTP Request-Response cycles. Anywhere in the code, you can access the `currentLanguage` value via `Express.Request` object.

```ts
import { IHookParameter } from "axe-api";

const onBeforeInsert = async ({ req }: IHookParameter) => {
  console.log(req.currentLanguage);
};

export { onBeforeInsert };
```

The `currentLanguage` type is look like the following interface;

```ts
interface ILanguage {
  title: string; // Full title of the language code, en-GB
  language: string; // Short title of the language code: en
  region?: string | null; // Regional title of the language code: GB
}
```

:::tip
You can import this interface from `axe-api` like the folowing example;

```ts
import { ILanguage } from `axe-api`
```

:::

## Form validation messages

As a developer, you don't have to do anything for the form validation messages. `i18n` structure works perfectly with form validation messages. The form validation message language will be set automatically by the client's HTTP Request Header.

For example, if you want to support German in your application, you should configure your files like the following examples;

`app/Config/Application.ts`

```ts
const config: IApplicationConfig = {
  // ...other configurations
  supportedLanguages: ["en", "de"],
  defaultLanguage: "en",
};
```

The form validation messages will be shown in **German** if the client sends an HTTP request like the following one;

```bash
$ curl \
  -d '{"name": "", "surname":""}' \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "Accept-Language: de" \
  -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/users
```

This is the HTTP response example;

```json
{
  "errors": {
    "email": ["Das email Feld muss ausgefüllt sein."],
    "name": ["Das name Feld muss ausgefüllt sein."],
    "surname": ["Das surname Feld muss ausgefüllt sein."]
  }
}
```

:::tip
You can find all the supported languages from [validatorjs](https://github.com/mikeerickson/validatorjs) via [here](https://github.com/mikeerickson/validatorjs/tree/master/src/lang).
:::

## HTTP Response

Axe API adds the [Content-Language](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Content-Language) HTTP headers to the responses.

This is an example result;

```yaml
Content-Language: en-GB
```

You can use this value to understand which language has been selected as the language in an HTTP request.

## System Messages

Axe API may throw many system errors for developers. These messages will not be able to translate due to they are not related to users.
